angular dynamic components (#987)
oktadeveloper/okta-blog: _source/_posts/2021-12-03-angular-dynamic-components.md

---
layout: blog_post
title: "Loading Components Dynamically in an Angular App"
author: alisa-duncan
by: advocate
communities: [javascript]
description: "A tutorial that shows how to create an Angular app with dynamic component loading."
tags: [javascript, typescript, angular]
tweets:
- "Use dynamic component loading for ultimate flexibility! Build an @angular app with dynamic components."
- "Showing components conditionally is a breeze with dynamic components in @angular. See how in this tutorial."
image: blog/angular-dynamic-components/social.jpg
type: awareness
---

Businesses have unique and complex needs. In addition to the user or organization-specific data to show, there might be a need to display different views and content conditionally. The conditions might include the user's role or which department they belong to.  The information about a user might be part of the authenticated user's [ID token as a profile claim](/blog/2017/07/25/oidc-primer-part-1).

> In [Angular](https://angular.io), you can show different components or even parts of templates conditionally using built-in directives such as `*ngIf`. But as the number of conditions to evaluate or the differences in the view changes, managing the correct view to display becomes difficult. These types of scenarios are where [dynamic components](https://angular.io/guide/dynamic-component-loader) are helpful. Angular has the mechanics to load components at runtime so you can dynamically display content. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In [Angular](https://angular.io), you can show different components or even parts of templates conditionally using built-in directives such as `*ngIf`. But as the number of conditions to evaluate or the differences in the view change, managing the correct view to display becomes difficult. These types of scenarios are where [dynamic components](https://angular.io/guide/dynamic-component-loader) are helpful. Angular has the mechanics to load components at runtime so you can dynamically display content. 
```
plural verb

> In [Angular](https://angular.io), you can show different components or even parts of templates conditionally using built-in directives such as `*ngIf`. But as the number of conditions to evaluate or the differences in the view changes, managing the correct view to display becomes difficult. These types of scenarios are where [dynamic components](https://angular.io/guide/dynamic-component-loader) are helpful. Angular has the mechanics to load components at runtime so you can dynamically display content. 

Reviewer 2: This line is bit confusing to read IMO. May be breaking it further down will help

Author: @deepu105 Can you help me understand if there's a particular sentence that's confusing or if it's this whole paragraph? You might have had a better LOC attributed to the suggestion, but I think I lost it when I committed other changes. Sorry about that.

Reviewer 2: Well it's not a big deal, may be its just me. I thought "But as the number of conditions to evaluate or the differences in the view changes, managing the correct view to display becomes difficult." could be clearer but please ignore me if you think it's alright

>  After following the instructions in the post, you'll have an Angular app using Material controls that displays unique content based on an authenticated user's claim value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 After following the instructions in this post, you'll have an Angular app using Material controls that displays unique content based on an authenticated user's claim value.
```
removes ambiguity

>  After following the instructions in the post, you'll have an Angular app using Material controls that displays unique content based on an authenticated user's claim value.

Reviewer 2: May be a link to the material component?

The main flow for the application is after initially launching a welcome page; you'll log in using Okta from a button in the toolbar and redirect to the guarded content. The toolbar now displays your name, and you'll see a rotation of dynamically created components based on a user claim from your ID token.

{% img blog/angular-dynamic-components/overview.gif alt:"animated image showing logging in and displaying dynamic contents" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

In this post, we'll
* Set up an Angular application with routing and lazy-loaded modules
* Create an OIDC client in Okta
* Add authentication to the Angular application
* Capture authenticated user information and user claims
* Simulate an external server call and implement the dynamic components
* Complete displaying the dynamic components using the user claim value

> We'll be covering a lot in this post to build out a non-trivial Angular application. As a result, this post assumes some Angular knowledge. We'll be blazing through some parts to spend more time working through the dynamic components and user profile information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll be covering a lot in this post to build out a non-trivial Angular application. As a result, this post assumes some Angular knowledge. We'll be blazing through some basics to focus on working through the dynamic components and user profile information.
```
streamlining suggestion

> If you are new to Angular, check out the following fantastic resources and guides first

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are new to Angular, check out the following fantastic resources and guides first:
```
punctuation

* [Angular Quickstart](https://angular.io/guide/what-is-angular)
* [A Quick Guide to Angular and GraphQL](/blog/2021/10/22/angular-graphql#integrate-oidc-for-auth)

**Prerequisites**

> * A valid version of [Node](https://nodejs.org/) for Angular v13, such as Node 14.15

Reviewer 2: Nit: Can we use Node.js here as I believe that's what we use in other blogs

* [Angular CLI](https://cli.angular.io)
* [Okta CLI](https://cli.okta.com/)

> {% include toc.md %}

Reviewer 2: Wouldn't toc look better before prerequisite?

## Scaffold the Angular application

The [Angular CLI](https://cli.angular.io) automates creating Angular apps quickly. It makes the project folder and scaffolds the application shell. We'll pass in the parameters to
* add routing
* use scss for styles
* use inline templates
* use inline styles

> * skip tests (the code repo includes tests to show working tests with testbed setup and authentication service spies, so feel free to include tests if you want to try that yourself)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* skip tests (The code repo includes tests to show working tests with testbed setup and authentication service spies, so feel free to include tests if you want to try that yourself.)
```
The sentence in parens needs to be treated as a full sentence (which it is). Or, you could add it after the bulleted list as a "Note" or parenthetical standalone sentence.

> We'll have a lot of small components in this application, so having inline templates and styles allow us to minimize the number of files to touch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll have a lot of small components in this application, so inline templates and styles will allow us to minimize the number of files to touch.
```
avoid verb grammar ambiguity

Run the following command to create an Angular v13 app.

```bash
npx @angular/cli@13 new dynamic-components --routing --style=scss --inline-template --inline-style --skip-tests
```

You now have a directory named `dynamic-components` with a working application skeleton. All CLI commands in the rest of this post should be run inside the project directory.

Next, we'll add the Angular Material component library to the application using their schematic. We'll pass in the parameters to
* set the theme
* add typography
* enable animations

Run the following command with preset values to add the Angular Material v13 library and affirm that you will proceed with the installation.

```bash
 ng add @angular/material@13 --theme=custom --typography=true --animations=true
```

> ## Create components for the initial view

Reviewer 2: May be a a callout asking user to run the app with ng run or npm start at this point might be nice, so that further changes will live reload as the progress

> We can now add our code with our application scaffolded and libraries added. Start by creating three components: a `Home` component that contains the application's default view, `Menu` component to handle logging in, `Profile` component to display your name after authentication by running the following code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With our application scaffolded and libraries added, we can now add our code. Start by creating three components: a `Home` component that contains the application's default view, a `Menu` component to handle logging in, and a `Profile` component to display your name after authentication by running the following code.
```
rejiggered first sentence for flow. Added articles to the list of components.

```bash
ng generate component home
ng generate component menu
ng generate component profile
```

We can update what we'll first see when loading the application with these components. Open the project in your favorite IDE and open the `src/app/app-routing.module.ts` file to add `HomeComponent` as a default route, as shown below.

```ts
const routes: Routes = [  
 { path: '', component: HomeComponent }  
];
```

Next open `src/app/app.module.ts`. We need to add some modules for the Material components we'll use.

In the `NgModule` `imports` array, add the following Angular Material component modules: 
* `MatToolbarModule` from `@angular/material/toolbar`
* `MatIconModule` from `@angular/material/icon`
* `MatButtonModule` from `@angular/material/button`
* `MatMenuModule` from `@angular/material/menu`

> We can now update the templates. Open `src/app/app.component.ts` and replace the entire component with the following code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we can update the templates. Open `src/app/app.component.ts` and replace the entire component with the following code.
```
vary the opening word(s) of consecutive sentences for better readability

{% raw %}
```ts
@Component({  
  selector: 'app-root',  
  template: `  
    <mat-toolbar color="primary" class="toolbar">
      <h1>My favorite work app</h1>
      <div>
        <app-profile></app-profile> 
        <app-menu></app-menu> 
      </div>
    </mat-toolbar>
    <router-outlet></router-outlet> 
  `,  
  styles: [`  
   .toolbar { display: flex; justify-content: space-between; }
 `]  
})  
export class AppComponent { }
```
{% endraw %}

> We added a Material toolbar that displays text, along with the contents of the `Profile` and `Menu` components. We'll update the template of those components in a bit. Below the toolbar, the `<router-outlet></router-outlet>` shows the view for the current route. You should see the output of the Home component when you serve the app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We added a Material toolbar that displays text, along with the contents of the `Profile` and `Menu` components. We'll update the template of those components in a bit. Below the toolbar, the `<router-outlet></router-outlet>` shows the view for the current route. You should see the output of the `Home` component when you serve the app.
```
consistent use of code syntax

Open `src/app/home/home.component.ts`, which is your welcome landing page. Feel free to change the template and styles to whatever suits you. 

I added text, an illustration, and styles like below for my tastes.

{% raw %}
```ts
@Component({  
  selector: 'app-home',  
  template: `  
    <div class="welcome">
      <h2 class="mat-display-1">Welcome! Log in to get started.</h2>
      <img src="assets/welcome.svg" alt="welcome illustration" />
    </div> `,  
  styles: [`  
    .welcome {
      display: flex;
      flex-direction: column;
      align-items: center;  
 
      h2 { margin: 3rem; }  
      img { width: 40%; } 
    } 
  `]  
})  
export class HomeComponent { }
```
{% endraw %}

## Create module for dynamic components

> Next, we'll create a new module, `Protected`, to hold the view guarded by authentication. We can pass in the parameters for routing, creating the default component, and lazy-loading by running the following command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we'll create a new module, `Protected`, to hold the view guarded by authentication. We can pass in the parameters for routing, creating the default component, and lazy-loading, by running the following command.
```
clarifying comma

We'll put all the code in the same folder by running the following code.

```bash
ng generate component protected/department
ng generate directive protected/department/dynamic
```

Now on to the dynamically created components themselves. There's a base interface for all dynamically created components that contains component data named `DynamicComponent`. We're being a little tricky for the CLI here, so we need to rename the interface after we generate it manually. First, create the interface by running the following command.

```bash
ng generate interface protected/department/dynamic --type=component
```

Open the `src/app/protected/department/dynamic.component.ts` file and rename the interface from `Dynamic` to `DynamicComponent` to help us better keep track of what the interface provides.

We have three dynamically created components to display content: `Clawesome`, `Pawesome`, and `Smiley`.

```bash
ng generate component protected/department/clawesome --flat
ng generate component protected/department/pawesome --flat
ng generate component protected/department/smiley --flat
```

> Let's get the main view for the `Protected` module set up. The default view in this module shows `ProtectedComponent`, which displays a task list and the `DepartmentComponent` dynamic component loader. First, we'll import the Material component modules, then update the `Protected` component template, styles, and populate the task list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's get the main view for the `Protected` module set up. The default view in this module shows `ProtectedComponent`, which displays a task list and the `DepartmentComponent` dynamic component loader. First, we'll import the Material component modules, then update the `Protected` component template and styles, and populate the task list.
```
clarifying 'and' in a series

  'Reply to their inquiry',
  'Set up the automation'
];
```

For the `ProtectedComponent`'s template, we'll use Material's List component. Update the inline template and styles code to look like the following.

{% raw %}
```ts
@Component({  
  selector: 'app-protected',  
  template: `  
    <div class="dashboard">
      <main>
        <h2>My tasks</h2>
        <mat-selection-list #todo class="task-list">
          <mat-list-option *ngFor="let task of tasks">  
            {{task}}  
          </mat-list-option>
        </mat-selection-list>
      </main>
      <app-department></app-department>  
   </div>
   `,  
  styles: [`  
    .dashboard { 
      margin-top: 2rem; display: flex;  
      main { 
        width: 75%;
        h2 { text-align: center; }
        .task-list { width: 80%; margin: auto; }
        mat-selection-list { max-width: 800px; }
      }
    }
  `]  
})
```
{% endraw %}

If you want to check out your work by running the application, you'll need to manually type in the route for the `Protected` module as part of the URL.

```markup
localhost:4200/protected
```

When we add authentication, we'll automatically route to it.

## Dynamic component loading

> Next, let's get into this exciting dynamic component loading part! How this works is the `Department` component is the container for the dynamic components and controls which component to show. The `Department` component HTML template contains an `ng-template` element with a helper directive to identify where to add the dynamic component to the view.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, let's get into this exciting dynamic component loading part! Here's how this works. The `Department` component is the container for the dynamic components, and controls which component to show. The `Department` component HTML template contains an `ng-template` element with a helper directive to identify where to add the dynamic component to the view.
```
reworks passive voice and eliminates the double "is"

> Angular v13 included updates to their API to make working with dynamic components more straightforward. We could use Angular Component Development Kit (CDK) [Portals](https://material.angular.io/cdk/portal/overview) instead since it has extra helper functionality, but let's take the updated Angular APIs out for a spin. 😁

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Angular v13 included updates to the Angular APIs to make working with dynamic components more straightforward. We could use Angular Component Development Kit (CDK) [Portals](https://material.angular.io/cdk/portal/overview) instead since it has extra helper functionality, but let's take the updated Angular APIs out for a spin. 😁
```
removes ambiguity of "their"

Author: @havi I changed it to be very explicit. LMK if you think it needs an update. Thx!

> Angular v13 included updates to the `ViewContainerRef` API to make working with...

Author: @havi I changed it to be very explicit. LMK if you think it needs an update. Thx!

> Angular v13 included updates to the `ViewContainerRef` API to make working with...

Reviewer: lgtm! thank you

> Each of the dynamic components needs the same base component interface. In our case, the base component interface is the `DynamicComponent` interface. Open each dynamic component file, `Clawesome`, `Pawesome`, and `Smiley`, and implement the `DynamicComponent` interface to the class. The interface is empty now, but we'll add members later. Feel free to remove the `OnInit` lifecycle hook too. The `Clawesome` component class looks like the following example, and the `Pawesome` and `Smiley` components classes should look similar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each of the dynamic components needs the same base component interface. In our case, the base component interface is the `DynamicComponent` interface. Open each dynamic component file, `Clawesome`, `Pawesome`, and `Smiley`, and implement the `DynamicComponent` interface to the class. The interface is empty now, but we'll add members later. Feel free to remove the `OnInit` lifecycle hook too. The `Clawesome` component class looks like the following example, and the `Pawesome` and `Smiley` component classes should look similar.
```
is the double plural needed? seems like only "classes" needs an 's'

```ts
export class DepartmentComponent implements OnInit, OnDestroy {  
 @ViewChild(DynamicDirective, {static: true}) private dynamicHost!: DynamicDirective;  
  private interval: number|undefined;  
  private currentIndex = 1;  
  
  private messages: { type: Type<DynamicComponent> }[] = [  
    { type: ClawesomeComponent },  
    { type: PawesomeComponent },  
    { type: SmileyComponent }  
  ];  
  
  public ngOnInit(): void {  
    this.loadComponent();  
    this.rotateMessages();  
  }  
  
  public ngOnDestroy(): void {  
    clearInterval(this.interval);  
  }  
  
  private loadComponent(): void {  
    if (this.messages.length === 0) return;  
    this.currentIndex = (this.currentIndex + 1) % this.messages.length;  
    const message = this.messages[this.currentIndex];  
  
    const viewContainerRef = this.dynamicHost.viewContainerRef;  
    viewContainerRef.clear();  
  
    const componentRef = viewContainerRef.createComponent<DynamicComponent>(message.type);  
  }  
  
  private rotateMessages(): void {  
    this.interval = window.setInterval(() => {  
      this.loadComponent();  
    }, 10000);  
  }  
}
```

> Let's talk through the `loadComponent` method in a little more detail. First, we're making sure we're rotating through the messages sequentially by keeping track of where in the array we are, then clearing out the previous component. To dynamically load the component, we use the directive as an anchor and create the component into its position in the DOM. The `createComponent` method requires the component type, not the instance. We use the base interface as a generic type for all the components and use concrete component type in the method parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's talk through the `loadComponent` method in a little more detail. First, we make sure we're rotating through the messages sequentially by keeping track of where in the array we are, then clearing out the previous component. To dynamically load the component, we use the directive as an anchor and create the component into its position in the DOM. The `createComponent` method requires the component type, not the instance. We use the base interface as a generic type for all the components, and use concrete component type in the method parameter.
```
changed verb tense for flow, and added clarifying comma

If you look at your app, you'll see the components rotating!

## Add authentication

Now we can start customizing based on the user information. 

{% include setup/cli.md type="spa" framework="Angular" loginRedirectUri="http://localhost:4200/login/callback" logoutRedirectUri="http://localhost:4200" %}

Make a note of the `Issuer` and the `Client ID`. You will need them in the following steps.

> We can use the Okta provided Angular SDK to connect to the OIDC client quickly. Add the two packages by running the following command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can use the Okta-provided Angular SDK to connect to the OIDC client quickly. Add the two packages by running the following command.
```

```ts
import { OKTA_CONFIG, OktaAuthModule } from '@okta/okta-angular';
import { OktaAuth } from '@okta/okta-auth-js';

const oktaAuth = new OktaAuth({
  issuer: 'https://{yourOktaDomain}/oauth2/default',
  clientId: '{yourClientID}',
  redirectUri: window.location.origin + '/login/callback'
});
```

Next, add `OktaAuthModule` to the `imports` array and configure the provider for the `OKTA_CONFIG` token, as shown below.

```ts
@NgModule({
  ...
  imports: [
    ...,
    OktaAuthModule
  ],
  providers: [
    { provide: OKTA_CONFIG, useValue: { oktaAuth } }
  ],
  ...
})
```

Okta has a component for the login callback, but we need to add the route. Open `src/app/app-routing.module.ts` and add the following to your routes array.

```ts
{ path: 'login/callback', component: OktaCallbackComponent }
```

We also want to guard the `Protected` component route to authenticated users. Okta has a guard we can use. Open `src/app/protected/protected-routing.module.ts` to add a `canActivate` guard to the default route. Your routes array will look like the code snippet below.

```ts
const routes: Routes = [{ path: '', component: ProtectedComponent, canActivate: [OktaAuthGuard] }];
```

> For the actual logging in part, open `src/app/menu/menu.component.ts` to add a menu with login and logout buttons. We'll use some Okta provided code to log in, log out, and identify the authenticated state. Update the component code to match the code below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the actual logging in, open `src/app/menu/menu.component.ts` to add a menu with login and logout buttons. We'll use some Okta-provided code to log in, log out, and identify the authenticated state. Update the component code to match the code below.
```
clarifying, removing ambiguity

  public name$: Observable<string> = this._authStateService.authState$.pipe( 
    filter((s: AuthState) => !!s && !!s.isAuthenticated),  
    map((s: AuthState) => s.idToken?.claims.name ?? '')  
  );  
  
  constructor(private _authStateService: OktaAuthStateService) { }  
}
```
{% endraw %}

Now you see your name when you log in to the application.

## Format the dynamic components

All the messages have data to display. The data always includes an URL plus other content that is unique to each component. Let's define the interface to support the message data. Run the following command to create the interface.

```bash
ng generate interface message
```

There'll be three different message formats, one for each dynamic component. So we'll define a message type, standardized data properties, and a class that holds the type and data properties. Open `src/app/message.ts` and replace the contents with the following code.

```ts
export type MessageType = 'Pawesome' | 'Clawesome' | 'Smiley';  
  
export interface MessageData {  
  url: string;  
  content?: any;  
}  
  
export class MessageItem {  
  constructor(public type: MessageType, public data: MessageData) { }  
}
```

> When we created the dynamic components earlier, they all implemented the same base interface, `DynamicComponent`. Since all the dynamic components have some data, we need to update the `DynamicComponent` interface to reflect this shared property that all components will implement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we created the dynamic components earlier, they all implemented the same base interface, `DynamicComponent`. Since all the dynamic components have some data, we need to update the `DynamicComponent` interface to reflect this shared property that all the components will implement.
```

  template: `  
    <mat-card class="card">
      <mat-card-header>
        <mat-card-title>{{data.content.name}}</mat-card-title>  
        <mat-card-subtitle>Good doggo</mat-card-subtitle>
      </mat-card-header>
      <img mat-card-image src="{{data.url}}" alt="Photo of a pawesome creature" >  
      <mat-card-content>
        <p> {{data.content.about}} </p>
      </mat-card-content>
    </mat-card>
  `,  
  styles: [` .card { max-width: 300px; } `]  
})  
export class PawesomeComponent implements DynamicComponent {  
 @Input() data!: MessageData;  
}
```
{% endraw %}

Finally, open `src/app/protected/department/smiley.component.ts`. The only data in this message type is the URL. Update the component to the following.

{% raw %}
```ts
@Component({  
  selector: 'app-smiley',  
  template: `  
    <mat-card class="card">
      <img mat-card-image src="{{data.url}}" alt="Photo of a smiley creature" >  
      <mat-card-content>
        <p>SMILE!</p>
      </mat-card-content>
    </mat-card> `,  
  styles: [` .card { max-width: 300px; } `]
})  
export class SmileyComponent implements DynamicComponent {  
 @Input() public data!: MessageData;  
}
```
{% endraw %}

> The rotating components look a little goofy now and you'll see a lot of errors in the console, but we'll get it fixed up here soon.

Reviewer 2: Is this line gramattically correct?

Author: Maybe a little folksy, but I think correct (also ran through Grammarly). I edited it to '... but we'll get it fixed up soon.' so that it's less folksy. Does that help?

## Add claim in Okta dashboard

Next, we need to add the claim. We'll assign a department to the user and create a claim that pulls in the department value. We can do this in the Okta dashboard. Navigate to **Directory** > **People** and click the user you'll log in with. 

Navigate to the **Profile** tab and press **Edit**. Scroll down to **Department** and enter the number `1`. We'll label the department names as either `1` or `2` for ease of coding.

Since we see different content by user claim, it's helpful to have more than one user. If you have a second user, update their department name to `2`, but you can also edit the department value between logging in.

> For the claim, navigate to **Security** > **API** and select your Authorization Server to edit in the Okta dashboard. If you are using a Developer Account, you'll have one named "default". In your "default" Authorization Server, navigate to the **Claims** tab. Press the **Add Claim** button to create a new claim. Name your claim "department", always include it in the "ID Token", and set it to value to `user.profile.department`. Your inputs should look like the image below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the claim, navigate to **Security** > **API** and select your Authorization Server to edit in the Okta dashboard. If you are using a Developer Account, you'll have one named "default". In your "default" Authorization Server, navigate to the **Claims** tab. Press the **Add Claim** button to create a new claim. Name your claim "department", always include it in the "ID Token", and set its value to `user.profile.department`. Your inputs should look like the image below.
```
is this correct?

    }  
  },  
  {  
    type: 'Smiley',
    data: {  
      url: 'https://cdn.pixabay.com/photo/2017/06/17/13/11/axolotl-2412189_960_720.jpg'  
    }  
  }  
];
```

There's one more property to add. A real server call should only return the messages relevant to the department of the caller. Users of department "1" shouldn't see the messages for department "2" by inspecting the network response. We'll handle this within the service by creating a mapping for message types by the department. Add the `departmentMapping` property and update the constructor for the service as shown below.
 
 {% raw %}
 ```ts
private departmentMapping: Map<number, MessageType[]> = new Map<number, MessageType[]>();  
  
constructor() {  
  this.departmentMapping.set(1, ['Smiley']);  
  this.departmentMapping.set(2, ['Pawesome', 'Clawesome']);  
}
```
{% endraw %}
 
Now let's add a method to get the messages. Add the following code to filter the hard-coded messages.

```ts
public getMessages(department: number): MessageItem[] {  
  const messageTypes = this.departmentMapping.get(department) ?? [];  
  return this.messages.filter(m => messageTypes.includes(m.type));  
}
```

> Next, we need to call this service method. To do so, we'll need to read the claims values of the authenticated user and pass in the department to the `getMessages` method. We'll access the claim through the ID token from Okta's auth state subject. Even though we're in a guarded route, we'll still add the safety measures to verify the user authentication and to return a default value if the claim isn't on the ID token for some reason. Open `src/app/protected/protected.component.ts` and update to the following code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we need to call this service method. To do so, we'll read the claims values of the authenticated user and pass in the department to the `getMessages` method. We'll access the claim through the ID token from Okta's auth state subject. Even though we're in a guarded route, we'll still add the safety measures to verify the user authentication, and to return a default value if the claim isn't on the ID token for some reason. Open `src/app/protected/protected.component.ts` and update to the following code.
```
simplify verb phrase, clarifying comma

```ts
@Input() public messages: MessageItem[] = [];
```

You'll have a new error in the app because our code in the `loadComponent` method expects a component type. We'll add a factory method to return the component type to create by matching the `MessageType` to the component type like the following example.

{% raw %}
```ts
private componentTypeFactory(type: MessageType): Type<DynamicComponent> {  
  let comp: Type<DynamicComponent>;  
  if (type === 'Pawesome') {  
    comp = PawesomeComponent;  
  } else if (type === 'Clawesome') {  
    comp = ClawesomeComponent;  
  } else {  
    comp = SmileyComponent;  
  }  
 return comp;  
}
```
{% endraw %}

Then we can update the `loadComponent` method to use the factory method. We also have message data to pass into the components, although the dynamic components can't support the input property. Update the code and add the new line of code to pass data to the components like the code block below.

{% raw %}
```ts
const componentRef = viewContainerRef.createComponent<DynamicComponent>(this.componentTypeFactory(message.type));  
componentRef.instance.data = message.data;
```
{% endraw %}

> Now everything should compile, and you have a working app that displays a rotating set of cute animals images to help you power through working on that task list. Try logging in as a user with a different department (or change the department value for yourself in the Okta dashboard) to see the various dynamic components at work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now everything should compile, and you should have a working app that displays a rotating set of cute animals images to help you power through working on that task list. Try logging in as a user with a different department (or change the department value for yourself in the Okta dashboard) to see the various dynamic components at work.
```
parallel verb structure

You can find the code for [this project on GitHub](https://github.com/oktadev/okta-angular-dynamic-components-example).

> We did a lot in this tutorial and had a lot of dependencies on Material and Okta libraries. Please check out [this commit](https://github.com/oktadev/okta-angular-dynamic-components-example/commit/3f1e18092e30ee17c8722b73899a52adb825be50) to see the changes required to run tests and mock the Okta services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We did a lot in this tutorial and had a lot of dependencies on Material and Okta libraries. Please check out [this commit](https://github.com/oktadev/okta-angular-dynamic-components-example/commit/3f1e18092e30ee17c8722b73899a52adb825be50) to see the changes required to run tests and mock up the Okta services.
```
removes ambiguity

Author: @havi I'd like to change this to one of the following instead since "mock up" doesn't feel right for a testing mock. Thoughts on which one?

> ... to see the changes required to run tests and mock out the Okta services.

or

> ... to see the changes required to run tests and create mocks of the Okta services.

Reviewer: @alisaduncan I prefer the 2nd, "create mocks"  I think it's because "mock out" feels less familiar to me (vs mock up).

## Learn more

> We covered a lot in this post, tried out a new API, and checked out some cool concepts. If you liked this post, check out the following.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We covered a lot in this post, tried out a new API, and explored some cool concepts. If you liked this post, check out the following.
```
removes redundancy
